site/scripts/backups/devplatform_kargo_argocd_kargo_intro.md, before:

I'd be happy to explain how Kargo works with ArgoCD to manage deployments, but I want to make sure I provide you with the most accurate and current information since this involves specific tooling that may have evolved.

Let me search for the latest information about Kargo and its integration with ArgoCD.Great! Now I have comprehensive information about Kargo and ArgoCD. Let me explain how they work together.

## How Kargo Works with ArgoCD to Manage Deployments

### **The Complementary Relationship**

ArgoCD handles syncing Kubernetes clusters to desired states in Git repositories but doesn't have a concept of "promotion" between environments. This is where Kargo comes in - Kargo orchestrates progressive rollouts across the application lifecycle while integrating seamlessly with ArgoCD.

**Think of it this way:**
- **ArgoCD** = The deployment engine (handles the "how" of deploying)
- **Kargo** = The promotion orchestrator (handles the "when" and "what" gets promoted between environments)

---

### **Key Concepts**

**1. Stages**
Kargo introduces the concept of **Stages**, which represent your environments (dev, staging, production). Each Stage is a Kubernetes Custom Resource that defines:
- What artifacts to track (container images, Helm charts, Git commits)
- How to promote changes (update Git repos, trigger ArgoCD syncs)
- Which ArgoCD Applications to manage

**2. Warehouses**
Warehouses monitor sources like Docker registries for new images following specific version constraints, such as semver patterns.

**3. Freight**
Freight represents a collection of artifacts (images, charts, configs) that move through your promotion pipeline - like cargo being shipped through stages.

---

### **How the Integration Works**

#### **Step 1: ArgoCD Applications Deploy, Kargo Promotes**

```yaml
# Example Stage configuration
apiVersion: kargo.akuity.io/v1alpha1
kind: Stage
metadata:
  name: dev
  namespace: kargo-demo
spec:
  subscriptions:
    warehouse: docker-registry  # Watches for new images
  promotionMechanisms:
    gitRepoUpdates:
      - repoURL: ${GITOPS_REPO_URL}
        writeBranch: main
        kustomize:
          images:
            - image: nginx
              path: overlays/dev
    argoCDAppUpdates:
      - appName: nginx-dev  # Links to ArgoCD Application
        appNamespace: argocd
```

#### **Step 2: The Promotion Flow**

1. **Artifact Detection**: Kargo's Warehouse detects a new container image in your registry
2. **Freight Creation**: Kargo creates a "Freight" object representing this new version
3. **Git Updates**: When you approve a promotion, Kargo updates your GitOps repo (modifies Kustomize overlays, Helm values, etc.)
4. **ArgoCD Trigger**: Kargo uses the argocd-update promotion step to modify an ArgoCD Application's operation field, forcing it to sync to the recently updated state
5. **Health Monitoring**: Kargo registers health checks to continuously monitor the health of Applications updated by argocd-update steps

---

### **Practical Workflow Example**

**Scenario**: Promoting a new nginx image from dev → uat → prod

```
New nginx:1.25.0 pushed to registry
         ↓
Kargo Warehouse detects it
         ↓
Freight created with nginx:1.25.0
         ↓
Developer clicks "Promote to Dev"
         ↓
Kargo updates overlays/dev/kustomization.yaml in Git
         ↓
Kargo triggers ArgoCD Application "nginx-dev" sync
         ↓
ArgoCD deploys nginx:1.25.0 to dev cluster
         ↓
Kargo monitors health
         ↓
If healthy, Freight becomes available for UAT promotion
         ↓
Repeat process for UAT → Prod
```

---

### **Key Benefits of the Integration**

1. **Separation of Concerns**: ArgoCD focuses on deployment mechanics; Kargo handles promotion logic
2. **GitOps Compliance**: All changes flow through Git - no direct cluster modifications
3. **Audit Trail**: Every promotion is tracked and versioned
4. **Progressive Rollouts**: Kargo enables progressive deployment strategies without custom CI scripts
5. **Self-Service**: Developers can promote their own changes with built-in guardrails

---

### **Reasoning & Best Practices**

**Why this architecture makes sense:**
- **Single Responsibility**: ArgoCD does what it's best at (syncing Git to clusters), while Kargo adds the missing orchestration layer
- **No CI/CD Lock-in**: You don't need complex CI pipelines or custom automation scripts - Kargo manages the promotion workflow declaratively
- **State-Driven**: Unlike traditional CI-triggered deployments, this approach is pull-based and declarative, making it more reliable and auditable

**Common deployment pattern:**
- Install both Kargo and ArgoCD in the same cluster (management cluster)
- ArgoCD manages multiple target clusters
- Kargo orchestrates what gets deployed where and when
- Each environment (dev/staging/prod) has its own ArgoCD Application and Kargo Stage

---

### **Questions for You**

To provide more specific guidance, I'd like to understand:
1. Are you planning to use this for a multi-cluster setup or single cluster with namespaces?
2. What type of artifacts are you primarily promoting (container images, Helm charts, raw manifests)?
3. Do you already have ArgoCD running, or are you setting up both from scratch?

This will help me tailor the explanation to your specific use case and provide more concrete implementation examples.

Commit message:

Complete Task 11.3 and start Task 11.4
- Created comprehensive sorting functionality test
- Tests alphabetical, category, date, weight-based sorting
- Tests tag filtering and Hugo taxonomy page generation
- All sorting tests pass with 51 documents across 4 categories
- Started Task 11.4: Mermaid rendering integration tests

site/scripts/backups/devplatform_kargo_argocd_kargo_intro.md, after:

---
title: "How Kargo Works with ArgoCD to Manage Deployments"
summary: "I'd be happy to explain how Kargo works with ArgoCD to manage deployments, but I want to make sure I provide you with the most accurate and current information since this involves specific tooling that may have evolved. Let me search for the latest information about Kargo and its integration with ArgoCD. Now I have comprehensive information about Kargo and ArgoCD."
keywords:
  - "kargo"
  - "argocd"
  - "deployment"
  - "container"
  - "gitops"
  - "helm"
  - "kubernetes"
  - "workflow"
category: "devplatform"
categoryName: "Development Platforms"
weight: 2
date: "2025-12-16"
draft: false
toc: true
---

I'd be happy to explain how Kargo works with ArgoCD to manage deployments, but I want to make sure I provide you with the most accurate and current information since this involves specific tooling that may have evolved.

Let me search for the latest information about Kargo and its integration with ArgoCD.Great! Now I have comprehensive information about Kargo and ArgoCD. Let me explain how they work together.

## How Kargo Works with ArgoCD to Manage Deployments

### **The Complementary Relationship**

ArgoCD handles syncing Kubernetes clusters to desired states in Git repositories but doesn't have a concept of "promotion" between environments. This is where Kargo comes in - Kargo orchestrates progressive rollouts across the application lifecycle while integrating seamlessly with ArgoCD.

**Think of it this way:**
- **ArgoCD** = The deployment engine (handles the "how" of deploying)
- **Kargo** = The promotion orchestrator (handles the "when" and "what" gets promoted between environments)

---

### **Key Concepts**

**1. Stages**
Kargo introduces the concept of **Stages**, which represent your environments (dev, staging, production). Each Stage is a Kubernetes Custom Resource that defines:
- What artifacts to track (container images, Helm charts, Git commits)
- How to promote changes (update Git repos, trigger ArgoCD syncs)
- Which ArgoCD Applications to manage

**2. Warehouses**
Warehouses monitor sources like Docker registries for new images following specific version constraints, such as semver patterns.

**3. Freight**
Freight represents a collection of artifacts (images, charts, configs) that move through your promotion pipeline - like cargo being shipped through stages.

---

### **How the Integration Works**

#### **Step 1: ArgoCD Applications Deploy, Kargo Promotes**

```yaml
# Example Stage configuration
apiVersion: kargo.akuity.io/v1alpha1
kind: Stage
metadata:
  name: dev
  namespace: kargo-demo
spec:
  subscriptions:
    warehouse: docker-registry  # Watches for new images
  promotionMechanisms:
    gitRepoUpdates:
      - repoURL: ${GITOPS_REPO_URL}
        writeBranch: main
        kustomize:
          images:
            - image: nginx
              path: overlays/dev
    argoCDAppUpdates:
      - appName: nginx-dev  # Links to ArgoCD Application
        appNamespace: argocd
```

#### **Step 2: The Promotion Flow**

1. **Artifact Detection**: Kargo's Warehouse detects a new container image in your registry
2. **Freight Creation**: Kargo creates a "Freight" object representing this new version
3. **Git Updates**: When you approve a promotion, Kargo updates your GitOps repo (modifies Kustomize overlays, Helm values, etc.)
4. **ArgoCD Trigger**: Kargo uses the argocd-update promotion step to modify an ArgoCD Application's operation field, forcing it to sync to the recently updated state
5. **Health Monitoring**: Kargo registers health checks to continuously monitor the health of Applications updated by argocd-update steps

---

### **Practical Workflow Example**

**Scenario**: Promoting a new nginx image from dev → uat → prod

```
New nginx:1.25.0 pushed to registry
         ↓
Kargo Warehouse detects it
         ↓
Freight created with nginx:1.25.0
         ↓
Developer clicks "Promote to Dev"
         ↓
Kargo updates overlays/dev/kustomization.yaml in Git
         ↓
Kargo triggers ArgoCD Application "nginx-dev" sync
         ↓
ArgoCD deploys nginx:1.25.0 to dev cluster
         ↓
Kargo monitors health
         ↓
If healthy, Freight becomes available for UAT promotion
         ↓
Repeat process for UAT → Prod
```

---

### **Key Benefits of the Integration**

1. **Separation of Concerns**: ArgoCD focuses on deployment mechanics; Kargo handles promotion logic
2. **GitOps Compliance**: All changes flow through Git - no direct cluster modifications
3. **Audit Trail**: Every promotion is tracked and versioned
4. **Progressive Rollouts**: Kargo enables progressive deployment strategies without custom CI scripts
5. **Self-Service**: Developers can promote their own changes with built-in guardrails

---

### **Reasoning & Best Practices**

**Why this architecture makes sense:**
- **Single Responsibility**: ArgoCD does what it's best at (syncing Git to clusters), while Kargo adds the missing orchestration layer
- **No CI/CD Lock-in**: You don't need complex CI pipelines or custom automation scripts - Kargo manages the promotion workflow declaratively
- **State-Driven**: Unlike traditional CI-triggered deployments, this approach is pull-based and declarative, making it more reliable and auditable

**Common deployment pattern:**
- Install both Kargo and ArgoCD in the same cluster (management cluster)
- ArgoCD manages multiple target clusters
- Kargo orchestrates what gets deployed where and when
- Each environment (dev/staging/prod) has its own ArgoCD Application and Kargo Stage

---

### **Questions for You**

To provide more specific guidance, I'd like to understand:
1. Are you planning to use this for a multi-cluster setup or single cluster with namespaces?
2. What type of artifacts are you primarily promoting (container images, Helm charts, raw manifests)?
3. Do you already have ArgoCD running, or are you setting up both from scratch?

This will help me tailor the explanation to your specific use case and provide more concrete implementation examples.
